So welcome back, now we're going to build
up and talk about some slightly more
complex conditional execution
patterns that you can build up.
So as you do the if-then-else, again,
one of the things to do is to visualize
the blocks, start thinking of the blocks.
And in this case, you'd think of the block
as sort of starting at the if and
then ending after the last indented line.
But the if and the else kind of
are a piece of one thing and
you can sort of think of
this as the block, right?
And one of the things about these blocks
is they have one entrance and one exit,
not that that's a big deal.
But it's a good way to think about how
you mentally start drawing the blocks.
You see one entrance and one exit,
and there's some complexity,
there's some logic that
you're sort of building.
And that's how these blocks work.
So the next step up in
complexity is a multi-way if.
And that uses a keyword called elif, which
is really a combination of else and if.
So the way it works is, probably easier
to do this on a GPS version of it.
Is it comes down here,
forget what's in here, it asks yes or no.
If it's yes, it runs this one,
and then it's all done.
If it's no and then yes,
it runs this one, and it's all done.
And if it's no, no, no,
it runs this one and it's done.
A key thing is it's only
going to do one of these three.
It's not going to do two,
it's only going to do one.
And it checks these questions in order.
And then this else is like a catch-all.
So let's take a look at how
this particular one works.
It depends on the value of x.
So let's, what if x were 0?
Well, if x were 0, it would come in,
ask the question, is x less than 2?
Yes, it is.
So it'd run this code and
it would finish down here.
So it would come over here, true,
run, and now skip all the way down.
If you draw blocks,
the box would be this box right here.
It skips out of the box, or
if you draw the box over here,
the box would be right here.
Once you're done with this line of code,
with this block of text right there, or
block of code, you exit the block.
You don't like come back and
look at this question.
You have run, one thing has turned true,
and you're done.
If, on the other hand, x was 5, you would
see a situation where it would come in.
This would be false, and so it would skip.
Then it comes to this next elif,
this becomes true.
So then it jumps in and
does this code, runs out, and is done.
Does not run that,
does not run that, does run that.
So, comes in.
No, it's not less than 2.
It is less than 10, so
we'll run that little block of code, and
now we are all done completely.
So no, no, but yes, okay?
And so that's how it works.
These are done in sequence.
They're not looked at sort of in
parallel or all at the same time.
If, on the other hand, x was 20,
it would say false, skip, question mark.
False, skip.
Oh, else. Then the else always gets
triggered if it gets that far, and
then it runs that one.
So here we say if it's less than 2, no
it's not, is it less than 10, no it's not.
And if it's there, then we just hit
the else part, and we finish and
we continue on.
So this part doesn't run,
this part doesn't run, and that part runs.
The rule is one of the three will run,
and the other two will not.
It only triggers once.
Once it's triggered, then it's
done with the whole if statement.
And again, I think of this as the block,
and you'll see in a second.
Once one of these things hits true, it runs
this and then exits the block completely.
So there's other variations on this.
You can if you want have no else.
So there's no need to have an else.
What we've done is we've simply
deindented this next line.
There's no else here, but that's okay.
It does mean that for some value of,
they might not either execute,
right, because there's no else.
If there's else,
then at least one will execute.
But if there's no else, then it could
be possible that zero executed.
In this case, x is 5,
it's not going to do this one but
it is going to do that one
because x is less than 10.
But if x was, for example,
50, then that would be false,
that would be false, and we just go.
And then neither of these two
things would execute if x were 50.
Okay? So it just means you don't have
to have an else if you don't want to.
Further, you can have lots of elifs.
If x is less than 2, do this,
elif, elif, elif, elif, elif.
And remember, it checks them in order,
first, second, third, fourth, fifth.
So if x was 15, this would be false,
this would be false,
this would be true, so
it would run this code.
And then it would come down
whatever is next down here.
So again, only one of these
is going to trigger.
No, no, yes, no, no, no.
I mean, 15 is indeed less than 40.
If it came here, it would be true, but
it doesn't matter, because one is triggered,
and so then it takes the entire block,
and there's our entire block.
So as soon as it executes one,
the next thing to do is exit
right out of the block.
Okay, got it?
Okay, so here are a couple of puzzles.
I'll give you a second to pause this.
And the question is, to look at
some of these, depending on for
a particular value of x,
you will have none of them execute.
So which will never happen for
some particular value of x?
Meaning you can pick any value for
x you want, but
there's some that you
can't cause to execute. Okay?
So I'll pause for a second
and let you pause
the video if you want and
then I'll come back and
explain it to you.
Okay, you had some time to pause.
Hopefully, you did pause or
didn't pause, but it doesn't matter.
You can still pause while I'm
talking until I start drawing and
telling you the answer.
Okay, so in this one, if x is less than 2,
do this, else if x greater than or
equal to 2.
The one that's never going to
execute is this one right here.
And that's because, no matter what
value of x, it is either less than
equal to 2 or greater than or equal to 2.
So for any value of x, no matter what you
pick, it's either going to run this one or
this one.
But it's never going to run that one for
any value of x, okay?
So, that's a little tricky.
I just happened to have constructed my
logical questions in such a way that
they covered all values of x, and
so the else was kind of irrelevant.
Now, I wouldn't even draw this this way.
If I was going to draw this,
or write this code,
I would probably just make this be
an else : and this not be there.
But this was more of
a puzzle than anything else.
So in this next one, we have to remember
that these things happen in order.
So if x is less than 2,
we're going to run this.
If it's less than 20,
If it's less than 10
we're going to run this.
But the problem is, all values of x
that are less than 10, for
which this would become true,
this is always true.
So a value like 6, this becomes true.
So that means that if it's something
like 6, it's going to run this and
come out and
never ask this question, right?
So that's the key, even though this
is true and this is true for the 6,
it never even gets here because
this one triggered first.
Okay, and so that's why this is the line
of code that no matter what the value for
x, will never run.
Okay, so the last conditional
code is what's called the try and
except structure.
And if you learn other
programming languages,
this sort of catching errors
is a more advanced concept.
But in Python, we tend to have to use it
earlier because there are things where if
you don't use it, the code blows up.
And the whole idea of a try
except is that you have a bit of
code that you know might fail,
and so you kind of want a take
out an insurance policy on it and
say, hey, give this a try.
If it works, great, if it doesn't,
do this other thing.
Don't blow up, don't get a traceback.
And so this is a way to eliminate or
catch a traceback.
Something that would
otherwise be a traceback.
That's what this is for.
So if you got some line of code, and
you know that this might blow up and
have a traceback,
then you use try/except around it, okay?
So let's take a look at something.
This is a sample we had
from the previous code.
And it comes down, it sticks Hello Bob in,
then it converts this to an integer.
And we know that if these things
are aren't digits, this code blows up, and
so it runs and we get the traceback.
And the traceback happens because of this
line right here, but the key thing about
the traceback is that the traceback,
as I told you before, it stops.
And it stopped at line 2, which means
this is the last line it executed, but
it doesn't continue,
which means this code is gone.
I mean, it never gets there
because it's like,
I'm confused, I'm quitting,
I have quit at line 2, okay?
I quit at line 2.
So that code, it's as if it's not there.
Now sometimes that's fine with you,
you just want to blow up and
you want to see the message, you want to
go look at line 2 and fix line 2 or
maybe you typed the wrong stuff in.
But sometimes you want to
control for this.
You want to say, you know what,
I know what I want to do here,
and I don't want to die,
I don't want to blow up.
I want to continue, I want to put
out an error message instead.
And so, the key is, is when this code
blows up, it's something that you kind of
take personally because you
are that set of instructions, and
when a traceback happens inside the memory
or CPU, that's you that's being vaporized.
You've been traced back, and so
we take it kind of personally.
I mean, if you were to use software
that I built, like the autograder for
this class and
you started getting tracebacks,
I'm like, hey,
that's kind of a personal thing.
I didn't do my job well,
I didn't catch all the errors.
I didn't think of everything.
You could type something that
will cause my code to blow up.
And so I take that kind of personally.
And so we have to be able to
compensate for
situations that we know
might cause errors.
Especially those where
the user can type something
that can cause my program to blow up.
That's really, like,
I'm going to let you blow my program up?
I am going to compensate.
I'll tell you, sorry, that's bad data.
But I don't want you to
ever see a traceback
because it's kind of shameful to see
a traceback for a professional programmer.
Okay, so here's how it works, it's a bit
of stuff with some indentation and colons.
It looks like a lot, but
don't worry, you'll figure it out.
So the idea is, is you have a line
of code that you know is dangerous.
So this conversion of an integer,
let's just say this came
from an input statement.
In this case,
we'll just make it be Hello Bob.
We know this is going to fail.
And so, this is the line in which we
kind of want to take out insurance on it.
So instead of just putting
this line in here,
like we did in the previous example,
we just had it right there.
Instead of taking that line there, we'd say,
you know what, we're going to take and
stick this in a try and except block.
So we say the word try.
Try ends in a colon, which means
it's an indented block of code.
And then we put the dangerous line
in there, and then we put except.
And then the except is kind of
like an else, an if-then-else, but
what it really is is code that Python
will execute if something goes wrong.
So this is either going to run and
work and skip this.
Or if it goes bad, it's going to run,
blow up, and then run this stuff and
then continue on.
But in no case you will get a traceback,
meaning if this line is going to generate
a traceback,
it actually just runs the except clause.
So it's kind of like if things work out,
do this,
if things don't work out,
do this other thing.
So in this case, when this runs, this is
going to fail, because that's Hello Bob.
And then it's going to come out here and
set this to -1.
So that's going to blow up.
Set this to -1,
that's going to print it out.
So it says, First equals -1.
And so we didn't traceback.
In the previous time we ran this,
it traced back because we caught it.
Now, the way the try/except works is,
if everything is fine, it has no effect.
So if we, the next thing we're going to
convert is 123, the digits, 1, 2, 3,
in a string.
We do a try, and we try to convert it and
it works, and so we just keep on going.
We don't run the except.
So this code does not run
because this code succeeded,
there was no traceback that
was going to be generated.
There's a traceback generated up here.
There was no traceback generated here,
so it comes through, and
the result is istr ends up
with a integer, 123.
And so it's an insurance policy or
it says, I know this might blow up and
if it does, I'm giving you alternate
text or alternate code to run.
So the thing about the try/except block,
and you might be tempted to do this, and
that is,
if you're getting tired of tracebacks and
blowing up, you might want to put your
entire program in a try and except block.
And you might say try blah,
blah, blah, blah, and
then except something bad happens.
The problem is,
is if your program's blowing up,
you actually want to know about it.
And the way the try and except block works
is, if it's in the middle of a try and
except block and something goes wrong,
like in this particular line,
it doesn't come back and
finish the try and except block.
It actually exits to the except and
then comes out.
And to draw this in a diagram,
so here we go,
we start this thing,
we're in the try block.
We're doing print,
print's safe, doesn't hurt anything.
We do this,
this blows up with a traceback.
Traceback and
then that says go to the except block,
run whatever is in the except block and
then continue on.
What's not going to happen is it's not
going to go back up and do this, or
back up and try this one again.
No, no, no, no, no.
Once it gets the except block,
there's only one way out to the bottom, so
this line of code never executes.
And so that's one of the things
we try to do where we just,
you don't put too much stuff in.
You would put this print statement out
here and this print statement out here,
and you'd only put one line in
the try/except block, if possible.
Sometimes you put a few more lines
in there, but you try to minimize.
You know what line is dangerous.
Print is not dangerous,
these two prints are not really dangerous,
don't put them in the block.
Because any line in the block, as soon
as it hits a bad line with a traceback,
it's out of the block,
runs the except, and then continues on.
So here's a more practical example,
Where we're going to read
a number from the user and
print out either Nice work or
Not a number.
And so, we take an input statement,
which stops and waits for
us to type, and then we type 42.
And 42 goes into rawstr and
then we know that this int is dangerous.
Right? And this rawstr came from the user,
whatever the user typed.
And so we put it in the try block,
and if it's 42, it converts and
it says ival is greater than 0,
we print it out, so it says Nice work.
Now, we'll run this code again.
Okay, we run it a second time and
now we enter something, it says forty-two
but it's like f-o-r-t-y.
And so forty-two is what goes in here.
We as the programmer had no control over
what our crazy user was typing, right?
You're starting to be a programmer and
crazy users do crazy things to your poor
programs, even if they're
only like seven lines long.
So we got forty-two coming in here,
we know this is going to blow up, this
int is going to blow up with a traceback.
But that's okay, we've compensated for
that and we told Python, hey,
we know that might happen and
if you detect a traceback,
jump straight into the except block, run
this, set it to -1, and then continue on.
So this is the de-indent of
the try/except block, and
if it's greater than 0 we say Nice work.
But in this case, it's not, and
we say, Not a number, and so
it comes out with Not a number.
What's not here is a traceback.
There is no traceback in this,
that's what we achieved.
And it doesn't hurt.
When it works, the try/except kind of
does nothing because the except code,
when it works, is ignored.
So it's like code you add in case
something happens in an other line of code.
Pretty cool, actually.
So you have a couple exercises and
I've got some videos of those exercises.
So in summary,
what we talked about in this chapter is
comparison operators, logical questions.
A key is that these comparison
operators don't change their arguments.
You can say if x is less than 5,
doesn't change the value for x.
We have indentation and
how important indentation is.
One-way decisions with if,
two-way decisions with if-then-else.
Nested decisions where you have an if
inside of an if that moves on in.
Else-if, and then try and except to catch
errors that you want to catch, okay?
So, thanks a lot.